feat: add roster-bootstrap-rsa plugin design doc and scaffold for WRB streaming (#2631)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/design/wrb-streaming/bootstrap-roster-plugin.md

| `nodeId`            | 5       | `int64`  | Numeric node identifier. Used as the lookup key when verifying a signature from a specific node.                             |

All other `NodeAddress` fields (`ipAddress`, `portno`, `memo`, `nodeAccountId`, `nodeCertHash`, `serviceEndpoint`,
`description`, `stake`) are left unset in the persisted file.

**Serialization and deserialization (PBJ):**

```java
// Write
final Bytes encoded = NodeAddressBook.PROTOBUF.toBytes(nodeAddressBook);
Files.write(filePath, encoded.toByteArray());

// Read
final byte[] raw = Files.readAllBytes(filePath);
final NodeAddressBook nodeAddressBook =
        NodeAddressBook.PROTOBUF.parse(BufferedData.wrap(raw));
```

**Default file path:** `data/config/rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb`

**Notes:**
- The `RSA_PubKey` string in `NodeAddress` is the raw hex-encoded DER bytes without an `0x` prefix. Mirror Node
returns the key with a leading `0x` which must be stripped before storing.
- The file does not embed metadata such as network name or generation timestamp. Operators wishing to annotate the

> file should maintain a separate sidecar file or rely on filesystem timestamps.

Reviewer: We should probably keep the generation timestamp, so we know when we get newer data.

---

### 4.3 Mirror Node Fetch

When no local bootstrap file is present, the plugin queries the Mirror Node REST API endpoint:

```
GET {mirrorNodeBaseUrl}/api/v1/network/nodes
```

and maps the response into a `NodeAddressBook` by populating only `nodeId` and `RSA_PubKey` in
each `NodeAddress` entry.

**Pagination:** The API returns up to 100 nodes per page (default 25). The implementation must follow `links.next` until
it is `null` to collect all nodes.

**Field mapping:**

| Mirror Node JSON field | `NodeAddress` protobuf field |               Notes               |
|------------------------|------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| `node_id`              | `nodeId` (field 5)           | Direct mapping (int64)            |
| `public_key`           | `RSA_PubKey` (field 4)       | Strip leading `0x` before storing |

**Filtering:** Only include nodes where `public_key` is non-null and non-empty. Nodes without a public key are not

> eligible for RSA verification and must be excluded from the `NodeAddressBook`.

Reviewer: Do we filter these, or do we count them as failed verifications?
Honestly, there should never be an entry with no public key.

                    .rsaPubKey(rsaPubKeyHex)
                    .build());
        }
        nextPath = page.path("links").path("next").asText(null);
    }

    if (entries.isEmpty()) {
        throw new RosterFetchException(
                "Mirror Node returned zero nodes with RSA public keys");
    }
    return NodeAddressBook.newBuilder().nodeAddress(entries).build();
}
```

**Timeouts and retries:** The HTTP client must be configured with a per-request connect timeout (default 5 s) and read
timeout (default 10 s). Three retries with exponential backoff (initial delay 1 s) are sufficient. If the call fails
after retries the plugin logs a clear error and fails fast (see §4.4 for MN-down handling).

---

### 4.4 Startup Sequence

The plugin follows a **file-first** strategy consistent with `TssBootstrapPlugin`. The file check and any network call
happen in `start()`, after `init()` has stored the facility reference.

```
start() called
   │
   ├─ Bootstrap file exists at config path (rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb)?
   │       │
   │       YES ──► Read bytes → NodeAddressBook.PROTOBUF.parse() → validate (≥1 entry)
   │       │        │

>    │       │        ├─ On parse error or empty book: LOG ERROR → FAIL FAST (throw)

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: on parse error, we could fall back and try a fetch and replace the file? In addition to logging of course.

Does that conflict with a possibly intentional provision of a file? If so, this behavior could be configurable: if parse fails - fail fast OR go fetch and replace. If we go fetch and replace, we are effectively moving to the next step below, which is the query and the handling there remains same.

Author: You mean if file parsing fails?
Yeah I don't think we should replace the file in that case as we're unaware if the failure is a network related item that may be restored and we'd inadvertently change the node operators desired address book config

   │       │              └─ BlockNodeApp notifies all plugins via onContextUpdate
   │       │
   │       NO ──► Query Mirror Node API (paginated GET /api/v1/network/nodes)
   │               │
   │               ├─ SUCCESS: build NodeAddressBook (nodeId + RSA_PubKey per entry)
   │               │     └─ applicationStateFacility.updateAddressBook(book)
   │               │           ├─ BlockNodeApp writes rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb
   │               │           └─ BlockNodeApp notifies all plugins via onContextUpdate
   │               │
   │               └─ FAILURE (API unreachable / timeout / empty response):
   │                     LOG ERROR: "RSA address book could not be created — Mirror Node
   │                                 API unavailable. BN cannot verify WRB proofs."
   │                     FAIL FAST → shutdown BN
   │                     (see Open Question #1 below)
   │
   └─ Startup complete
```

**File-first rationale:** If the bootstrap file already exists there is no need to contact the Mirror Node. The file
was written on a previous successful startup and represents a known-good address book. Calling Mirror Node on every

> restart would add latency and introduce a network dependency for what is otherwise a deterministic local load.

Reviewer: I would still query mirror node, for updates in case the data was updated _after_ the file was written.

**Mirror Node down — fail-fast rationale:** An absent or unreadable roster means the BN cannot verify any WRB proof.
If the address book was not created the BN is in an unhealthy state. A clear error log at shutdown time is preferable
to silently accepting or rejecting all blocks without a functioning verification layer. Operators are expected to ensure

> either the bootstrap file is present or the Mirror Node is reachable before starting the BN.

Reviewer: Should we include a note that this should change when plugin health reporting is available?  I don't think we want hard failures if we can avoid them.

> **Open Question (see §12 #1):** Should the BN shut down immediately when the Mirror Node call fails, or should it
> start but leave RSA verification failing until the address book is populated? The current recommendation is **fail
> fast**. Additionally, publicly available snapshots of the on-chain `NodeAddressBook` (file `0.0.102`) can serve as

> > a fallback source for operators who cannot reach the Mirror Node API.

Reviewer: I would recommend retrying the mirror node every 5 minutes or so until it succeeds rather than failing the node entirely.

We might need to defer that until we have plugin health reporting, though.

**No mid-instance reload:** The roster is loaded once at `start()` and does not change for the lifetime of the BN
instance. Roster updates (e.g., a node leaving the network) require a BN restart with a refreshed bootstrap file or

> by deleting the file so the next startup fetches a fresh copy from Mirror Node. Runtime reload is tracked in #2563.

Reviewer: I'm not sure why we'd limit the roster to only loading on start.
We can update from mirror node while running without any difficulty; and even if we do not choose to do so initially, I don't think it's wise to design around a non-changing roster.  We should assume that it _might_ change and design to be data-safe if it does.

---

### 4.5 RSA Signature Verification

This section specifies the verification algorithm precisely enough to be implemented without reference to external code.
The algorithm is derived from the existing `SignatureValidation`, `SignatureDataExtractor`, and `SigFileUtils` classes
in `tools-and-tests/tools`, which in turn match the verification logic used by Hedera Mirror Node.

> **Proof type routing:** The BN determines which verification path to invoke based on the proof type present in each

> > block. No configuration flag is required:

Reviewer: Perhaps note that Verification will attempt to validate multiple block proofs if multiple proofs are available?

We still need to work out the priority for that; I suspect it will need to change a few times as the network completes the shift from records to TSS in stages.

>
> |    Block proof type     |             Verification path              |
> |-------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
> | `SignedRecordFileProof` | RSA roster verification (this plugin)      |
> | `StateProof`            | State proof verification (Phase 2a and 2b) |
> | `TssSignedBlockProof`   | TSS verification (`TssBootstrapPlugin`)    |
>
> Both Phase 2a and Phase 2b support `StateProof`. No operator-configured proof mode is needed.
>
> **Placement in the pipeline:** RSA verification is performed by the block verification layer
> (`BlockVerificationService`) immediately after a complete WRB is received from the publisher, before the block is

> > written to storage. The `RsaRosterBootstrapPlugin` supplies the `NodeAddressBook` via `onContextUpdate`; the
> > verification service reads it from `BlockNodeContext.nodeAddressBook()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> written to storage. The `ApplicationStateFacility` supplies the `NodeAddressBook` to plugins via `onContextUpdate`; the
> verification service reads it from `BlockNodeContext.nodeAddressBook()`.
```

| Zero valid signatures                    | Reject block; increment `rsa_verification_failure_total` |
| `validatedCount < threshold`             | Reject block; increment `rsa_verification_failure_total` |
| `node_id` not in `NodeAddressBook`       | Skip signature; increment `roster_mismatch_total`        |
| Zeroed signature bytes (all 0x00)        | Skip signature; log at DEBUG level                       |
| Malformed DER public key in `RSA_PubKey` | Skip signature; log at WARN level                        |

Rejected blocks are **not** written to storage. The publisher receives the appropriate `PublishStreamResponse` error
code.

---

### 4.6 Phase 2b Transition

When the network transitions from Phase 2a to Phase 2b:

1. Consensus nodes stop emitting WRBs and emit full Block Stream blocks with `TssSignedBlockProof`.
2. The BN automatically routes `TssSignedBlockProof` blocks to the TSS verification path — no configuration change is
   required. The `RsaRosterBootstrapPlugin` remains loaded and the `NodeAddressBook` remains in context but the
   verification layer stops using it for new blocks.

> 3. WRBs stored during Phase 2a remain fully queryable via `getBlock` and `subscribeBlockStream` — they are stored as
>    regular `.blk` files and no migration is required. Notably these will not contribute to future state contributions to
>    state services.

Reviewer: Not just "will not contribute", WRBs have no state data at all.

```suggestion
3. WRBs stored during Phase 2a remain fully queryable via `getBlock` and `subscribeBlockStream` — they are stored as
   regular `.blk` files and no migration is required. Notably WRBs have no state data or event data and will not support
   state management services.
```

        loop per signature in proof
            Verifier->>Verifier: SHA384withRSA.verify(pubKey, payload, sigBytes)
        end
        Verifier->>Verifier: validatedCount >= supermajority threshold?
    else StateProof
        Verifier->>Verifier: state proof verification path
    else TssSignedBlockProof
        Verifier->>Verifier: TSS verification path
    end
    alt verified
        Verifier-->>Handler: VERIFIED
        Handler->>Store: persist block
        Handler-->>Pub: BLOCK_ACKNOWLEDGED
    else failed
        Verifier-->>Handler: VERIFICATION_FAILED
        Handler-->>Pub: VERIFICATION_FAILED response
    end
```

---

## 6. Configuration

All properties are under the `roster.bootstrap.rsa` namespace.

|                        Property                         |  Type   |                    Default                     |                                      Description                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `roster.bootstrap.rsa.filePath`                         | string  | `data/config/rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb`          | Path to the local bootstrap file (binary protobuf). Relative to BN working directory.  |

Reviewer: This should be in the application state facility config namespace.

| `blocknode_rsa_verification_total`           | Counter   | `result={success,failure}`  | Count of WRB RSA proof verifications by result.                                              |
| `blocknode_rsa_verification_latency_seconds` | Histogram | —                           | Latency of the full RSA verification step per block (p50, p95, p99 buckets).                 |
| `blocknode_rsa_roster_entries_loaded`        | Gauge     | `source={file,mirror_node}` | Number of `NodeAddress` entries loaded at startup, labelled by source.                       |
| `blocknode_rsa_roster_mismatch_total`        | Counter   | —                           | Count of signatures where the signing node ID was not found in the loaded `NodeAddressBook`. |
| `blocknode_rsa_roster_load_duration_seconds` | Gauge     | `source={file,mirror_node}` | Time taken to load the roster at startup (for alerting on slow Mirror Node calls).           |

---

## 8. Security

### 8.1 Bootstrap file integrity

The `rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb` file contains the public keys used for proof verification. A tampered file would allow an

> attacker to substitute keys and have the BN accept forged proofs.

Reviewer: True, but tampering requires filesystem access, and at that point an attacker could inject any content they like without forging proofs.
If the BN is compromised to the point of arbitrary filesystem access (likely as root required to bypass filesystem namespace) then the system is already irrecoverable.

**Mitigations:**
- **File permissions:** `rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb` should be readable only by the BN process user (`chmod 600`). Document
this in the operator guide.
- **Checksum (deferred):** An optional SHA-256 checksum of the raw file bytes could be stored alongside the file and

> verified at load time. This is not required for Phase 2a but is tracked as a follow-on hardening item.

Reviewer: This has very limited value, and is costly in terms of processing.
Also, anything that could replace the block file could replace the checksum, so it is highly questionable there is any value here.

- **Mirror Node TLS:** The initial fetch uses HTTPS. Operators deploying a private Mirror Node should ensure TLS is configured.
- **Binary format note:** The binary protobuf format is not human-editable, which reduces accidental modification risk
compared to a JSON file. Intentional modification still requires a protobuf tool (e.g., `protoc --decode`, `prototext`).

### 8.2 Replay attack handling

The WRB has a `BlockHeader` with a block number that the Publisher and Verification logic utilize to ensure that blocks

> that have  already been processed are not replayed.

Reviewer: We actually don't care, at all, about replay. If a publisher sends the same block 100 times then we will keep verifying it until it's persisted, then respond with "duplicate" for all the rest.
Even if we backfilled a block repeatedly, it still only gets stored, it's not like we're executing transactions.

---

## 9. Operator Tooling

A script `tools-and-tests/scripts/node-operations/generate-roster-rsa-bootstrap.sh` should be provided. Its responsibilities:

1. Accept `--network <mainnet|testnet|previewnet>` and optionally `--mirror-node-url <url>`.
2. Query `GET /api/v1/network/nodes` (with pagination) to collect all nodes with non-empty `public_key`.
3. Build a `NodeAddressBook` protobuf, setting only `nodeId` and `RSA_PubKey` (stripped of `0x` prefix) per `NodeAddress` entry.

> 4. Serialize with `NodeAddressBook.PROTOBUF.toBytes()` and write to `rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb`.

Reviewer: Is there a mirror-node API to get the full address book as a single JSON response?  That would be simpler; storing the whole address book is simpler and not much different for data size.

5. Print a summary: number of entries written, file path, file size.

**Expected usage before a Phase 2a cutover:**

```bash
generate-rsa-roster-bootstrap.sh --network mainnet --output /opt/blocknode/data/config/rsa-bootstrap-roster.pb
```

Operators must regenerate and restart the BN if the address book changes (new nodes added, nodes removed).
The `blocknode_roster_entries_loaded` gauge metric provides a quick sanity check that the expected number of nodes was

> loaded at startup.

Reviewer: This shouldn't be necessary.  The address book (if managed by application state facility) can be updated dynamically and we probably want this plugin to do so (likely by querying MN daily or hourly to get the last update timestamp).

We _could_ watch the record stream ourselves, but there is a cost there we're trying to avoid.

**Fallback — public NodeAddressBook snapshot:** If the Mirror Node API is unavailable at the time of the pre-cutover
setup, operators can obtain a copy of the on-chain `NodeAddressBook` (file `0.0.102`) from a publicly available
snapshot of Hedera state (e.g., a Mirror Node state snapshot or community-maintained archive). The binary contents of

> `0.0.102` are directly compatible with the binary protobuf format expected by the plugin.

Reviewer: Is it worth noting here that this "file" is completely synthetic, is generated by the CN right _after_ upgrade, and might not be generated much longer?

| 1 | **Mirror Node down at startup — fail fast or degrade gracefully?** When the MN API is unreachable and no local file exists the current recommendation is to fail fast and shut the BN down. An alternative is to allow the BN to start but leave RSA verification failing until the address book is available. Operators who cannot reach MN can use a publicly available `NodeAddressBook` snapshot (on-chain file `0.0.102`) as a fallback to pre-populate the bootstrap file. | **Open.** Recommendation: fail fast. Final decision pending review.                                                                                                   |

> | 2 | Should the bootstrap file include a separate SHA-256 checksum sidecar for integrity verification?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Deferred — document the risk, implement in Phase 2a operational hardening if time allows.                                                                             |

Reviewer: This isn't worth doing, in my opinion, it adds no security...

| 5 | Should the roster structure used map to the `AddressBook` or the `TSSRoster`? If `AddressBook` then BN will support 2 types, if `TSSRoster` we may have to default certain values and couple the plugin.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | `AddressBook` was chosen to utilize the same pathway explored by MN and WRB CLI as well as support record files from genesis ousde of the Phase 2a timeline.          |

> | 6 | Should the BN at startup check if there have been AddressBook changes that it can quickly retrieve from MN? This would ensure that upgrades are light on the node operator and a simple restart is needed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | No, not initially. In future maybe the MAPI query logic can be optimized to update the address book at upgrade boundaries or upon request.                            |

Reviewer: We should probably check address book roughly hourly (much as SDKs do).
Waiting for an upgrade is not easy for BN to manage, and there is little reason not to check more often.

> | 7 | Should `RsaRosterBootstrapPlugin` have a defined lifetime? Should we note a timeline after which it can be removed? Currently, it makes sense to leave it around so that a BN can be the recipient of all WRBs at any point in the future. Note, it will require the MAPI calls to consider time ranges of address books.                                                                                                                                                        | BN should be able to support processing WRBs from genesis going forward by any operator on their own schedule. As such the plugin should remain and be run as needed. |

Reviewer: We can definitely remove this plugin once WRBs all have block proofs generated with a TSSSignature (StateProof type).
After that there is no generally applicable reason for a block node to try to manage the old address books.
